✅ Answer:
process.nextTick() queues the callback to be invoked before the next event loop tick. It's the highest priority.

setImmediate() queues the callback to be executed after the current poll phase of the event loop.

setTimeout(fn, 0) schedules the callback after a minimum delay, which can be greater than 0 depending on the system.

📌 Use process.nextTick() with caution — excessive use may block the event loop.

🔹 2. How do you handle CPU-intensive tasks in Node.js?
✅ Answer:
Node.js is single-threaded for JavaScript execution, so CPU-bound tasks can block the event loop. Solutions:

Offload to worker threads using worker_threads module.

Use a message queue (e.g., RabbitMQ) to delegate to another service (e.g., in Python or Go).

Cluster module: Spawn multiple Node.js processes to utilize multi-core CPUs.

🔹 3. How would you design a scalable Node.js microservices architecture?
✅ Answer:
API Gateway: Central point for routing, auth, and rate-limiting.

Services Communication: REST for simple, gRPC or message broker (Kafka, RabbitMQ) for high-performance.

Service Discovery: Use tools like Consul or Kubernetes.

Database per service: Keep data ownership clear.

Observability: Logging (Winston), Monitoring (Prometheus, Grafana), Tracing (Jaeger, OpenTelemetry).

🔹 4. What are some strategies for improving performance in a Node.js application?
✅ Answer:
Avoid blocking the event loop (no heavy computation in main thread).

Use caching (Redis) for frequently accessed data.

Use asynchronous I/O.

Use HTTP/2 where applicable.

Enable compression (gzip, brotli).

Use connection pooling for DBs.

Optimize data serialization/deserialization.

🔹 5. Explain memory leak detection in Node.js and how to mitigate it.
✅ Answer:
Detection:

Use --inspect and Chrome DevTools.

Use memory profilers like clinic, heapdump, memwatch-next.

Mitigation:

Avoid global variable leaks.

Remove unused event listeners.

Use WeakMap/WeakSet where appropriate.

Monitor heap usage with process.memoryUsage().

🔹 6. How do you manage configuration and secrets in a Node.js app?
✅ Answer:
Use dotenv for local .env management.

For production:

Use AWS Secrets Manager, Azure Key Vault, or Vault.

Load config using Twelve-Factor App methodology.

Avoid hardcoded secrets in the codebase.

🔹 7. Explain the concept of middleware in Express.js and how you'd write a reusable one.
✅ Answer:
Middleware is a function with (req, res, next) signature that executes during the request lifecycle.

Example:

js
Copy
Edit
function logRequest(req, res, next) {
  console.log(`${req.method} ${req.url}`);
  next();
}
app.use(logRequest);
Reusable middleware should:

Be stateless or use closures.

Use next(err) to handle errors.

🔹 8. How do you handle graceful shutdown in Node.js?
✅ Answer:
On SIGINT or SIGTERM, you should:

Stop accepting new connections.

Finish ongoing requests.

Close DB connections.

Clear intervals/timeouts.

Example:

js
Copy
Edit
process.on('SIGTERM', async () => {
  server.close(() => {
    db.close();
    process.exit(0);
  });
});
🔹 9. What are some common security concerns in Node.js and how do you mitigate them?
✅ Answer:
SQL/NoSQL Injection → Use ORM/ODM, validate inputs.

XSS/CSRF → Sanitize outputs, use CSRF tokens.

Insecure dependencies → Use npm audit, snyk, dependabot.

Exposed stack traces → Don’t expose internal errors in prod.

Rate-limiting → Prevent DoS attacks with libraries like express-rate-limit.

🔹 10. How do you manage versioning in a Node.js REST API?
✅ Answer:
URL versioning: /api/v1/users

Header versioning: Accept: application/vnd.myapp.v1+json

Code separation: Different routers/controllers for each version.

Deprecation handling: Provide headers and warnings before removing versions.
